the cities of refuge. That was a merciful provision of God, but we might link it to something
that could involve all of us, and that is the common expression, forgive and forget. I'm
sure you've heard it, and maybe you have tried to apply it. But maybe at the outset ask
yourself, were the cities of refuge a provision to forgive and forget? Well, if you were there
and some man chopping a tree, the axe head fell, flew off and bumped your uncle, killing him,
you think you'd be in position to say, oh, well, it was an accident. You didn't mean it. You feel
sorry. So why don't we just forgive and forget? No, that wasn't possible because the sanctity of
life and blood were involved in that case. But do they suggest the cities of refuge that God,
though merciful, does not forgive or forget? Well, if you open to the fourth chapter of Ephesians,
there is a verse there that makes it clear what the answer is. That is Ephesians 4 verse 32,
but become kind to one another, tenderly compassionate, freely forgiving one another,
just as God also by Christ freely forgave you. So certainly, we wouldn't disagree that God
is able to forgive. As to forgetting, in Jeremiah 31, a comment with regard to the new covenant,
said, I will forgive their error, and I will no longer remember their sin. So does God forgive and
forget? Think of the account of David. We know of his grievous sin, and still afterward, God said
to Solomon with regard to David, that David walked with integrity of heart with uprightness by
doing according to all that I commanded. So clearly, God had forgiven David, but how about forgetting?
Did God forget David's sins? We know about them because as they're recorded in the Bible, we don't
forget them, and certainly God's recording them. The Bible shows he doesn't forget them in the
strictest sense of the word. But with regard to David's serious sins, God was able to forget in
the sense of putting behind him David's sins and not remembering them in the sense of calling them
back to punish David time and time again. He, that is God, put David's sins behind him.
Well, what about us and the encouragement to forgive and forget? We know that there are times,
as mentioned earlier today, when individuals may rub us the wrong way, say something hurtful about
us, maybe it's like a stab of a sword, they may do something thoughtless, they may even betray
a confidence and hurt us in that way. So what's our reaction going to be? Get angry, say something
harsh and return, maybe simply avoid the brother or sister thereafter. Well, we mentioned Ephesians 432
Reddit and it said, freely forgiving one another, just as God, also by Christ freely forgave you.
So clearly, if we want to imitate God, then that involves being willing to forgive.
And that means putting the individuals trespasses behind us.
Realistically, how can we go about that? We might think of some physical wounds to illustrate the
point. Some wounds are small and light others more serious or deeper and they don't all require
the same reaction. But let's just imagine that we had an envelope and we used our finger to open
the envelope and then the process got a paper cut. Wow, that hurt. We wished we had used the
letter opener. We did. We used our finger and it really hurt. But isn't it true that if you've
done that a day or two later, you can't even remember where the wound is. I mean, you cut yourself,
but you've forgotten it. Some wounds, of course, are more serious or deeper. Let's just say you
needed an emergency appendectomy and it wasn't going to be done laparoscoptically with three small
holes, but rather with an open incision. Now, after that, would it be rational to stick your finger
through the incision and kind of poke around inside where the appendix had been? Would poking around
in the wound help things? Or rather, to let it go, forget about it. It might be hurtful to walk for
a few days, but in time, it's behind you. And in fact, now, if you've had an appendectomy,
you probably don't think about it. And maybe years since you thought about it,
oh, granted there may be a small scar on your abdomen, but it is put behind you.
Can that same concept be applied to unkind things that have been said about us, someone who
perhaps betrayed a trust? Now, what? Colossians chapter three, we might read the whole verse,
verse 13, continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely, even if anyone
has a cause for complaint against another, just as Jehovah freely forgave you, you must also
do the same. Now, we want to imitate Jehovah, do we not? And if God freely forgives, is that not
an incentive for us to try to do the same? Now, granted, that doesn't mean that Jehovah has
forgotten the trespass against us. Can we? Maybe, maybe not. We do recall what Jesus said in the
model prayer, however, when he said that as we forgive the trespasses of others, so God will
accordingly forgive our trespasses. Conversely, if we are disinclined to forgive the trespasses of
others, what can we expect of God for us? So then what is the essence applied personally of this
encouragement to forgive and forget? It means to forgive in the sense of letting go, not holding
on to the anger, not a feeling constant resentment thereafter, or not even gossiping about what was
done that that hurt us. Maybe it really is quite immaterial. Maybe it's simply like a paper cut
that in a couple of days, we don't even remember where the wound is. Can we do that with regard to
the offense or the hurt personally? But even with something more serious, an offense that seems deeper,
can we be like Jehovah, forgetting in the sense of putting it behind us, just as Jehovah
didn't thereafter, punish David time and time again. Can we put the fellow servants, air, offense,
perhaps a lack of trust? Can we put those things behind? It's realizing he or she is still our
brother. And it's an imperfect brother, just as weary and perfect. But put it behind and forgive
the trespass just as Jehovah forgives our trespasses.